THE OFFICIAL RULES OF OTHELLO

INTRODUCTION

It is the purpose of these rules to prescribe a standardized set of regulations 
for use in Othello
tournaments sanctioned by the United States Othello Association, and to thereby 
ensure that all
tournaments are conducted smoothly, uniformly, and fairly.

The exigencies of tournament play are too many and too various to be subsumed 
under any set of
regulations, no matter how encyclopedic.  These rules are therefore not meant 
to be comprehensive,
and the Tournament Director is expected to exercise intelligence and common 
sense when confronted
with contingencies not discussed herein.

These rules have been divided into ten separate sections as follows:

1.   Equipment

2.   The Starting Position

3.   The Move

4.   Determining the Winner and Scoring the Game

5.   The Timepiece

6.   Default

7.   Improper Moves

8.   General Conduct

9.   Penalties

10. Miscellaneous

SECTION 1:  EQUIPMENT

1.1.  Othello is played by two players on a board composed of 64 equal squares 
arranged in an 8-
square-by-8-square grid and with 64 discs which are black on one side and white 
on the other.

1.2.  If the disc trays are built into the playing board, then unless both 
players agree otherwise, the
board is placed so that the disc trays are directly in front of the players.

1.3.  Before the game begins, the discs are divided equally between the two 
players.

1.4.  If at any point during a game a player runs out of discs, then he may 
take as many discs as he
requires from his opponent, and his opponent must surrender the required discs 
without delay.

SECTION 2:  THE STARTING POSITION

2.1.  Before the game begins, each player places two discs on the board.  The 
discs should be placed on
the board's four central squares so that, as each player faces the board, discs 
with the black side facing
upwards lie on the near-left-to-far-right diagonal and discs with the white 
side facing upwards lie on
the near-right-to-far-left diagonal.


SECTION 3:  THE MOVE

3.1.  When placing discs on the board, one player always places discs with the 
black side facing
upwards and the other player always places discs with the white side facing 
upwards.  The former
player        is referred to as “Black”; the latter player is referred to as 
“White”.  Discs with the black side
facing upwards are referred to as “black discs”; discs with the white side 
facing upwards are referred to
as “white discs”.

3.2.  When it is his turn to play, a player places a disc in a vacant square so 
that in at least one direction
(vertically, horizontally, or diagonally) his newly-placed disc, acting in 
conjunction with a pre-existing
disc of his own color, brackets in an unbroken line one or more discs of his 
opponent's color.  The disc
or discs thus bracketed are then turned over or “flipped” to become the same 
color as the newly-placed
disc.  If a newly-placed disc produces bracketing in several directions at 
once, then all the bracketed
discs in all such directions are flipped.

3.3.  A full move consists of placing a disc on a square to which a legal move 
can be made (a “legal
square”) and flipping all the appropriate discs.  A move is not complete until 
all the appropriate discs
have been flipped.

3.4.  Black makes the first move of the game.

3.5.  Except as discussed in Rule 3.7, players take turns making moves.

3.6.  When it is his turn to move, a player may not refuse to move if there is 
a legal move available to
him.

3.7.  If on a player's turn there is no legal move available to him, then he 
forfeits his turn.

3.8.  If a player on his turn to move touches a disc to a legal square, then 
the player must move to that
square.

3.9.  If a player accidentally drops a disc onto the board, then he may 
retrieve that disc without penalty
no matter where it lands.  A disc is said to be “dropped” when it is not in 
contact with the player's hand
as it first touches the board.

3.10.  When it is his turn to move, a player may, if he wishes, straighten the 
alignment of the discs on
the board.

SECTION 4:  DETERMINING THE WINNER AND SCORING THE GAME

4.1.  The game is ended when neither player possesses a legal move.

4.2.  Except as discussed in Section 6 (Default), if after the game is ended a 
majority of the discs on the
board are black, then Black is the winner; if a majority of the discs are 
white, then White is the winner.
If there are an equal number of black and white discs on the board, then the 
game is a tie.


4.3.  Except as discussed in Rule 4.4 and Section 6 (Default), after the game 
is ended, Black is assigned
a score equal to the number of black discs in the final board position and 
White is assigned a score
equal to the number of white discs in the final board position.

4.4.  If a player succeeds in entirely eliminating all discs of his opponent's 
color from the board, then
regardless of the final board position that player is assigned a score of 64 
and his opponent is assigned
a score of 0.

SECTION 5:  THE TIMEPIECE

5.1.  During a game, each player is required to complete all his moves within 
the period of time
prescribed by the Tournament Director.

5.2.  Time usage is monitored by a timepiece, usually a dual-faced “chess 
clock” equipped with buttons
for starting and stopping each face and a “flag” or similar mechanism for 
indicating the moment when
the prescribed amount of time has expired.

5.3.  For the purposes of this section, the phrase “hits his clock” shall mean 
that a player pushes the
button above the clock-face nearest him all the way down so as to stop the 
clock nearest him (“his
clock”) and start the clock nearest his opponent (“his opponent's clock”); the 
phrase “stops the clock”
shall mean that both clocks are stopped by pushing either button half-way down.

5.4.  The choice of clock position (that is, whether the clock shall be on the 
left or right side of the
board) is granted to Black.  If the Tournament Director has prescribed a fixed 
position for the clock,
then Black is permitted to choose his seat and thereby determine his position 
relative to the clock.

5.5.  It is the joint responsibility of both players to confirm before the 
start of play that both clocks are
stopped and properly set.

5.6.  When the Tournament Director gives the signal to begin the game, White 
hits his clock.  Black is
then free to make his first move.

5.7.  During the course of a game, each player hits his clock after completing 
each of his moves (that is,
after placing a disc on the board and flipping all the appropriate discs).

5.8.  If at any point during a game a player on his turn has no legal move 
available to him, then he shall
indicate that his move is forfeited by saying “pass” and hitting his clock.

5.9.  If a player fails to hit his clock immediately after completing his move, 
then his opponent may
draw the failure to the player's attention, or he may wait for the player to 
notice and correct the
oversight, or he may proceed with his own next move, as he wishes.

5.10.  During the course of a game, only the Tournament Director is empowered 
to stop the clock.

5.11.  Once the clock is stopped, it may be started again only by order of the 
Tournament Director.

5.12.  A player may not obstruct his opponent's view of the clock at any point 
during a game.


5.13.  A player may not keep either of his hands in prolonged contact with the 
clock during a game.

SECTION 6:  DEFAULT

6.1.  If at any point during a game, a player's flag falls and his opponent's 
flag has not previously fallen,
then that player is in default.

6.2.  Even if a player has completed his final move of the game, he is still 
required to hit his clock
before his flag falls in order to avoid being in default.

6.3.  If a player's flag falls while he is in the process of making a move 
(that is, after he has touched a
disc to a legal square but before he has flipped all the appropriate discs), 
then he shall complete the
move before default is declared.

6.4.  If the falling of a player's flag goes unobserved, default occurs the 
moment the fallen flag is first
noticed by either player or by the Tournament Director.

6.5.  After a player's flag falls, the Tournament Director must be summoned to 
confirm the default.  The
defaulting player's clock must be allowed to run while the Tournament Director 
is summoned; if
necessary, the non-defaulting player may hit his clock without making a move in 
order to prevent his
clock from running while the Tournament Director is summoned.

6.6.  After the default has been confirmed, the defaulting player is declared 
the loser of the game and
his opponent is declared the winner.

6.7.  After the winner has been declared, the Tournament Director stops the 
clock and resets the
defaulting player's clock so as to allow him two minutes of additional play; at 
a signal from the
Tournament Director, the appropriate clock is then hit and the game continues.  
Likewise, if at any time
prior to the end of the game the non-defaulting player's flag falls, the 
Tournament Director resets the
non-defaulting player's clock to two minutes, the appropriate clock is then 
hit, and the game continues.
If at any time either player's flag falls a second time, then play ceases and 
the Tournament Director
declares the game ended.

6.8.  A defaulted game is scored as follows:  if neither player's flag has 
fallen a second time, then the
game is scored according the the procedures used for non-defaulted games (Rules 
4.3 and 4.4) unless
the non-defaulting player does not possess a majority of the discs, in which 
case the game is scored as a
32-31 win for the non-defaulting player; if the defaulting player's flag has 
fallen a second time, then the
game is scored as a 64-0 win for the non-defaulting player; if the 
non-defaulting player's flag has fallen
a second time, then the game is scored as a 32-31 win for the non-defaulting 
player.

SECTION 7:  IMPROPER MOVES

7.1.  If in the course of making a move a player flips one or more discs that 
should not be flipped or
fails to flip one or more discs that should be flipped, then he has the right 
to correct the error (and his
opponent has the right to demand a correction) provided that his opponent has 
not yet committed
himself     to a subsequent move.


7.2.  If a player places a disc of the improper color on the board and if his 
opponent's preceding move
was made with a disc of the proper color, then the erring player has the right 
to retract his move (and
his opponent has the right to demand a retraction) provided that his opponent 
has not yet committed
himself to a subsequent move; however, by virtue of the touch-move rule (Rule 
3.8) after the retraction,
the erring player must, if possible, make a proper move to the square where the 
improperly-colored disc
was placed.

7.3.  If a player places a disc of the improper color on the board and his 
opponent's preceding move
was likewise made with a disc of the improper color, then both improper moves 
and the resulting
reversed color assignments must stand for the remainder of the game.

7.4.  The time required to correct an improper move must be charged to the 
player who commits the
error.  Accordingly, if a player has hit his clock after making an improper 
move, then his opponent has
the right to hit his own clock (or the erring player must hit his opponent's 
clock) before a correction is
made.

7.5.  When asking that an improper move be corrected, a player must indicate 
clearly the nature of the
requested correction.  If the improper move in question is an illegal pass, the 
player requesting the
correction must indicate at least one legal move available to his opponent.

7.6.  If a player disturbed the board position, then the time required to 
restore the board to a position
acceptable to both players must be charged to the player responsible for the 
disturbance.  If a player
disturbs  the board position to the point where the board cannot be restored to 
a position acceptable to
both players, then the Tournament Director must be summoned.  The Tournament 
Director is
empowered to stop the clock and call upon any available resources (including, 
but not limited to,
transcripts   and spectators) in order to resolve the dispute.  If the 
Tournament Director concludes that
the     game cannot be resumed, then the player responsible for the disturbance 
shall be declared the loser
and his opponent shall be awarded a 64-0 win.

SECTION 8:  GENERAL CONDUCT

8.1.  A player is permitted to record his games or to have his games recorded 
by an associate.

8.2.  During a game, a player may not confer with any outside party, make use 
of any reference
material, or analyze the game on a separate board.

8.3.  During a game, a player may not leave the playing table except with the 
express permission of the
Tournament Director.

8.4.  A player may not distract, annoy, or harass his opponent in any manner 
whatsoever.

SECTION 9:  PENALTIES

9.1.  The Tournament Director may, at his discretion, warn or penalize any 
player who is guilty of
infractions of the rules or other misconduct.

9.2.  Penalties may include, but are not limited to, time dockage, game 
forfeiture, and encforced bodily


expulsion.  A game forfeiture shall be scored as a 64-0 win for the 
non-forfeiting player.

9.3.  When imposing a time dockage, the Tournament Director is empowered to 
adjust the guilty
player's clock so as to eliminate up to one-half the time remaining on the 
clock.  If in the opinion of the
Tournament Director the magnitude of the misconduct in question is such that 
the maximum allowable
time dockage constitutes insufficient punishment, then the Tournament Director 
is empowered to
increase the penalty by awarding extra time to the non-guilty player and 
adjusting the non-guilty
player's clock accordingly.

9.4.  If during a game, a player suffers a significant loss of time in 
summoning the Tournament
Director, the Tournament Director is empowered to adjust that player's clock so 
as to restore the lost
time.

9.5.  The USOA reserves the right to apply sanctions against any player who is 
guilty of repeated
infractions of the rules or flagrant misconduct.  These sanctions may include, 
but are not limited to,
stripping of championship titles, revocation of Grand Prix points, probationary 
exclusion from
tournament play, and permanent exclusion from tournament play.

SECTION 10:  MISCELLANEOUS

10.1.  Ignorance of these rules shall not excuse a player from abiding by them.

10.2.  Should any dispute arise during the competition due to factors not 
specifically discussed in these
rules, then the Tournament Director shall settle the dispute in the spirit of 
these rules and in the spirit of
fairness, and his decision shall be binding on all players.

10.3.  These rules may, from time to time, be revised or amended by a majority 
of the Board of
Directors of the United States Othello Association.

